+++
title = "Why do we blog?"
[taxonomies]
  tags = ["personal"]
+++

*Word Count: 279*

As my first actual blog post, I feel like it's fitting to discuss why I want to write a blog at all, as well as some expectations for content going forward (if I ever get around to it, that is). I think what initially inspired me was joining GT’s programming languages and compilers club, dependently-typed. The first few talks I attended were fascinating, and the club chairs pointed me to [lobste.rs](https://lobste.rs) as a great resource for tech blogs. Through that, I've spent much more time reading and learning about some of my favorite technical topics! I've since had the motivation to begin organizing my learning about some of these topics, particularly ones that I believe I'm either not well versed in, or those that I would like to master. 

The core idea here is that starting off, my blog is for me. It will be a place for me to document my journey through programming language theory, language design and implementation, and quantum computing. As I begin to get more and more confident, it may yet become a place for me to broaden my horizons or, perhaps, try my hand at teaching/explaining things. Time and time again, I've found myself collating several sources into a patchwork of knowledge in my mind, and this amalgamation of unique perspectives makes my understanding deeper; it would be awesome to one day see some of my work help another in a similar vein.

That's basically it for this blog (article?) I think. For future posts, I have no real expectation of min/max length, and I may also intersperse the technical talk with some more personal drabbles as well.

I hope you enjoyed,
- Arjun

