+++
title = "tuesday"
[taxonomies]
  tags = ["writings"]
+++

Today was interesting, an unassuming sort of day which walks past you on the trail, chirping up with a short “Hi” and a modest wave of the digits, ambling about at an average pace, not a care. He has places to be, to be sure, a being of righteous purpose and poise most days, but on this day his work is largely done, and he moves with the calm of the mid-afternoon lull that befits a job reasonably well done. This day carries notes of petrichor, of *just enough* of God’s own blood blessing us, as it is wont to do. The week has barely begun, and yet instead of a brusque and baleful bout of problems that tends to sink the ship, the bow of this week bursts *brightly*… with a light breeze and the sun peeking out gently from the clouds. This day wears well-worn jeans, of a slightly darker hue, but still well within the norm, and a nice clean black short-sleeves polo, wrinkles smarting the sides, perhaps a stain near the lower back. All in all, this is a fine day, certainly not *Monday*, or, God forbid, that horrid timeless moment at the end of Sunday where you realize you have work to contend with. No, today, like many before and many after, is a good, plain day. It keeps you company on the park bench, lets you take a brief moment of respite from the incessant houndings of the world, and then prods you awake when it’s time to return, waving its hand twice as goodbye as it saunters away, shoes thump thump thumping softly against the trail.
